---
alias: OSDev - Memory Allocation
---
# OSDev - Memory Allocation
## Heaping information together
#cs #osdev

There are a number of competing models of allocators, and it can be hard to find hte best one. This article provides a short overview of a few different models.

##### Bump Model
This is a very fast, but memory inefficient, model. Essentially, it allocates as much memory as it needs from its position, and when it has no more allocated items, frees all of its allocated space. However, this limits the number of allocated items on the heap, and is rather inefficient when deallocating space.

##### Linked List Model
This is a somewhat fast model that breaks down after a lot of use. It creates a linked list structure of data that is either allocated or free. It starts as a list with a single, free node covering the entirety of the heap. When an object needs to be allocated, it loops through the list to find the first free node that can fit the object's size, then splits that node into two nodes: one allocated part that is exactly the object's size + node's header and a free part, both of which are stored as nodes on the list. When a node needs to be deallocated, it is marked as being free, so that it can be written over by a new object. Eventually, after more objects (and smaller objects) are allocated, the heap becomes so frabgmented it can no longer be used.

##### Fixed Size Block Model
This is a fast model that is also memory inefficient; it is, however, better than the bump model. In this model, the heap is broken down into many fixed sized blocks. There are multiple sections of different sizes of blocks, i.e.bloc a section for 16-bit blocks, 32-bit blocks, 64-bit blocks, etc. Objects being allocated are rounded up to the next highest block size and are stored in one of these blocks, where they can be deallocated and the block can be reused later. Unfortunately, this means that some memory in the blocks may be left over, but the amount of unused object per block decreases as the blocks' sizes decrease.