---
alias: AP Physics - 0 Introduction
---
# AP Physics - 0 Introduction
### Measurement, Units, Conversion, and Uncertainty
#physics #school 

##### Sig Figs
Significant figures include all certain digits of a number and 1 uncertain digit. There are a few basic rules to figure out the number of sigfigs in a number:
1. All non-zero numbers count
2. Any zeros between non-zero numbers are significant
3. Leading zeros never count, before or after the decimal point
4. Trailing zeros count ONLY after the decimal point
5. Defined numbers have an infinite number of sigfigs
When doing math with sigfigs, depending on what functions are used, the answer must be rounded to a different number of sigfigs:
- Multiplication/Division: round the answer to the least number of sigfigs that the factors have
- Addition/Subtraction: round the answer to the leftmost last sigfig (uncertain digit) of the addends

##### Unit Conversions as fractions
Lets say we want to convert $1000m$ to $cm$. The conversion between $cm$ and $m$ is $100cm = 1m$, which can be represented as a fraction $\frac{100cm}{1m} = 1$. This means that if we multiply our initial $1000m$ by this fraction, we'll only be multiplying it by $1$, technically, thus we would not be changing the number at all. However, when we do that, we get to cancel the units and perform multiplication to get rid of the $m$ unit and add a $cm$ unit:
$$
1000m \times \frac{100cm}{1m} = 100000cm = 1 \times 10^5cm
$$
This is a very simple way to convert between units. Such conversions can also be chained:
$$
1000m \times \frac{100cm}{1m} \times \frac{1in}{2.54cm} = 
100000cm \times \frac{1in}{2.54cm} =
39400in = 3.94 \times 10^4in
$$
Don't forget to always do sig figs: if $1000m$ is a defined value, then there are $3$ sig figs from the $2.54cm$ portion of the conversion, meaning we have to limit our answer to just $3$ sig figs as well.

##### Dimensional Checks
Find the units of force in the equation $F_c = \frac{mv^2}{t}$ in the *MKS* system. MKS stands for *meters*, *kilograms*, *seconds*, and it indicates the default units to be used. Given that $m$ is mass, $v$ is velocity, and $t$ is time, we can fill in the units and solve:
$$
F_c = \frac{kg \cdot \left( \frac{m}{s} \right)^2}{s} =
kg \cdot \frac{m^2}{s^2} \cdot \frac{s}{1} =
\frac{kg \cdot m^2}{s}
$$
Therefore, $F_c$ can be represented in units of kilograms meters squared per second.

##### Percent Uncertainty & Uncertainty Values
Uncertainty values are the measure of how uncertain the uncertain place is in the number. If not given, it is assumed to be $\pm1$ in the uncertain place. The percent uncertainty can be given by the equation:
$$
\frac{u_{v}}{v}=p_{v}
$$
where $v$ is the value, $u_{v}$ is the uncertainty value of $v$, and $p_v$ is the percent uncertainty of $v$.

##### Percent Uncertainty through Equations
Find the percent uncertainty in the area of a circle whose radius is $1.8\times10^4$. First, let's find the percent uncertainty for the radius. The uncertainty value, when not given, is assumed to be $\pm1$ in the uncertain place, so in this case, $\pm0.1\times10^4$. Then, percent uncertainty is given by:
$$
\frac{0.1 \times 10^4}{1.8 \times 10^4} =
\frac{0.1}{1.8} = 0.05556 = 5.556\%
$$
Then, to calculate the percent uncertainty for the area, we can look at the formula for the area, $\pi r^2$, see that the power we raise the radius to is $2$, and multiply the percent uncertainty by it:
$$
5.556\% \cdot 2 = 11.112\%
$$
After sigfigging, the correct answer is revealed to be $11\%$.